---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/1/
type: stop
section_title: Introduction
title: Death and Burial in Egypt, Greece, and Rome
page_rank: 1
stop_id: 1
audio_file: stop_1.mp3
hero_images:
 - path: 01-introduction-01.jpg
alt_text: Introduction
---

## Salve! Welcome! 
This audio tour will explore what the ancient Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans believed about the afterlife and how they disposed of their dead.

Evidence for ancient funerary practices includes tombstones, grave goods, and human remains along with written and inscribed texts. Together, these sources provide information about funerary rituals, including treatment of the body, beliefs about the afterlife, and the relationship between the living and the dead. 

The three main ways of disposing of the dead in the ancient world were mummification, cremation, and inhumation. 

## Understanding the Soul
The ancient Egyptians used mummification to preserve the body after death so that the soul, the <i>akh</i>, could continue to receive nourishment. The ancient Greeks and Romans placed less importance on preserving the body itself, and therefore cremated or inhumed their dead. The Greek <i>psyche</i> (soul) was released when a deceased person’s eyes were closed during the <i>prothesis</i> (the laying out of the body). If either a Roman cremation or burial was incomplete, it was believed that the <i>animus</i> (soul) of the deceased was condemned to roam restlessly for eternity. Regardless of the different ways of disposing of the dead, beliefs about the afterlife were very important to the Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans. 

> Image: Giovanni Battista Piranesi. 1756. Le antichità Romane. Tomo III, tav. XXVI. // Opere di Giovanni Battista Piranesi, Francesco Piranesi e d'altri. Firmin Didot Freres, Paris, 1835-1839. Scans from www.coe.l.u-tokyo.ac.jp
