---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/2/
type: stop
section_title: Mummification
title: Late Period Death Mask
page_rank: 2
stop_id: 2
audio_file: stop_2.mp3
hero_images:
 - path: 02-second-stop-01.jpg
alt_text: Front of Death Mask
 - path: 02-second-stop-02.jpg
alt_text: Side of Death Mask
 - path: 02-second-stop-03.jpg
alt_text: Side of Death Mask
 - path: 02-second-stop-04.jpg
alt_text: Top of Death Mask
---
## Mummification
This is a life-sized death mask from an Egyptian mummy. It was made during the Late Period, at some point between 390 and 340 BC. The Egyptians perfected the art of mummification –an elaborate process that involved removing the organs of the deceased and placing them into Canopic jars, drying the body and coating it in resin, The body was then wrapped in cloth and linen and adorned with amulets. A mask like this would have been placed over the head and shoulders of the body in the final stages of mummification. 

## Why Mummify?
The Ancient Egyptians believed that their souls had three parts: akh (life force), ba and ka. When someone died, their ba travelled through the world of the living and into the afterlife, and is often depicted in the form of a human headed bird. The ka was identical to the physical body and could move around the tomb, and so it required continued sustenance.  Mummification ensured that the body was preserved and did not decay, enabling the triple spirit to be sustained. A death mask stood in for the physical head, and allowed the ba and ka to recognise the deceased whose face was obscured by layers of wrapping. 

On this mask, the main decoration is a large vulture on the top of the head. With its wings spread, it clasps 'Shen' signs in its claws. These signs take the form of a loop of rope which symbolised eternity and protection in Egyptian culture. The vulture is representative of the goddess Nekhbet, who was the patron deity of Upper Egypt and protector of the pharaoh, young children, and expectant mothers. 

It is impossible for us to know if the owner of this death-mask was male or female. As mummification was an expensive process, it is likely that mask belonged to a member of the elite classes.

> Images: Death-Mask with Mut, Egypt, Linen, Plaster, Gesso, 390-340 BC. Purchased from Charles Ede Ltd, London, with funds from Vice-Chancellor John Hay, the Friends of Antiquity, and The Alumni Association of the University of Queensland, 1998. Part of a French Private Collection, c. 1920. UQ 98.001

