---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/3/
type: stop
section_title: The Egyptian Afterlife
title: Shabti for Wedja-Hor
page_rank: 3
stop_id: 3
audio_file: stop_3.mp3
hero_images:
hero_images:
 - path: 03-third-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Shabti front
 - path: 03-third-stop-02.jpg
   alt_text: Shabti side
 - path: 03-third-stop-03.jpg
   alt_text: Shabti back 
---
## Servants of the Afterlife
For the ancient Egyptians the afterlife, or Field of Rushes, was a reflection of the real world they had left. The dead were granted a plot of land that they were expected to work and maintain. Shabtis were servants, mummiform figurines meant to perform manual labour in the afterlife. This allowed the deceased to pursue leisure activities such as hunting. Shabtis were placed in tombs, and are often depicted with agricultural implements such as picks, hoes and baskets, so that they could fulfil their role as farm labourers. 

We aren’t sure exactly where the name “shabti” comes from, but it is possible that they are named after either the Egyptian word for “stick” (reflecting their stick-like form) or after the word for “answer” (because shabits answer the call of their master). Both terms sound a bit like “shabti”.

Shabtis were mostly made out of faience, a mixture of crushed quartz or sand with glass, which could be worked much like pottery and covered in a glaze. Faience was widely used for small objects such as beads, amulets, and shabtis, as well as for cups, bowls, and decorative tiles. 

## Hundreds of Shabtis
From the New Kingdom onwards, kings and important officials were supplied with shabtis in considerable numbers. They varied greatly in material, size, and inscriptions, but could be incredibly detailed in design and decoration and were usually inscribed. This shabti is made of pale green faience. The arms of the figurine are crossed over the chest, and he holds a mattock in his left hand, and a hoe, rope, and basket in his right. A hieroglyphic spell is inscribed in three vertical panels down the legs. The spell reads: 

### “Oh, these shabtis, if one counts off the Osiris Wedja-Hor, born of Ast-em-Khebit, to do every work (in) the god's land - 'here I am', [you] shall say.”

> Images: Shabti for Wedja-Hor, Egypt, faience, 664 - 525 BC. Sold by Sotheby's, London, before 1972. Acquired by Dr Jocelyn Tranberg, Hill End, from Antiquities and Ethnographica Society, Adelaide, 07/10/1972. UQ 91.006
