---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/4/
type: stop
section_title: Commemoration in Classical Greece  
title: Gravestone for Theophile 
page_rank: 4
stop_id: 4
audio_file: NASA_main_Go_at_Throttle_Up.mp3
hero_images:
hero_images:
 - path: 04-fourth-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Gravestone for Theophile 
---

Ancient Greeks often commemorated the dead with a carved tombstone called a <i>stêlê</i>, sometimes featuring the name of the deceased. These tombstones could be decorated and preserved the memory of the deceased and of their family. This large grave <i>stêlê</i> for the woman Theophile not only records her name, but also includes a poem, written in ancient Greek, listing her virtues! It reads: 

### ‘Records of your virtue, Theophile, will never pass unnoticed, modest and excellent and industrious, possessing every virtue.’ 

This inscription is evidence for the role of women in ancient Greek society, and the values that Greek society attributed to an ideal woman. Theophile’s modesty and domestic excellence are highlighted because they are virtues expected of “good” women. These feminine virtues reflect positively on Theophile as an individual, and on her family as members of Greek society. 

The scene carved above the inscription reinforces this idea of family. The gravestone shows two figures grasping their right hands in a dexiosis  or handshake. This type of scene combines three different ideas: parting (the family and deceased saying farewell to one another); reunion (the deceased being welcomed by their ancestors in the afterlife); and communion between the living and the dead (representative of the ongoing relationship between the deceased and their family). 

## Ancient funeral monuments 

This type of tombstone was setup in ancient Athens in the first half of the 4th century BC in special family burial plots facing the roads into the city. As a result, Greek graves, and the associated rituals of mourning and visiting the deceased on special days, were very public activities. The gravestone to Theophile would have been one of many very public monuments recording the names, virtues, and achievements of the family members buried within. 

> Images: Gravestone for Theophile, Athens, Greece, marble, 400 BC - 350 BC. Purchased from Charles Ede Ltd, London, with funds from the Alumni Friends of the University of Queensland, the Friends of Antiquity, Mr J Ede, the RD Milns Classics and Ancient History Perpetual Endowment Fund, Drs V and H Osiecki, and other generous contributions, 2013. UQ 14.001.
