---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/5/
type: stop
section_title: Commemorating the Dead in Imperial Rome 
title: Memorial Tablet for Vitalis 
page_rank: 5
stop_id: 5
audio_file: stop_5.mp3
hero_images:
hero_images:
 - path: 05-fifth-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Memorial Tablet for Vitalis 
 - path: 05-fifth-stop-02.jpg
   alt_text: Vitalis as Artemis 
---

## Keeping Memories Alive
Roman cemeteries were located outside the <i>pomerium</i> (city boundary), often along main roads. Grave plots could be purchased by families, burial clubs, or awarded as an honour by officials.

Keeping alive the memory of the deceased was important to the Romans. Family members, friends or individuals named in wills honoured the dead on their birthdays and at festivals such as the Parentalia, from February 13-21, and the Lemuria, held in May. The deceased were honoured flowers, gifts of food, and special rites to appease evil spirits.

Many graves were marked by painted or inscribed memorials. 

## Vitalis: A Roman Girl 
This rectangular grave marker with a rounded top was designed to cover a niche in a tomb. In the niche was a container holding the ashes of a young girl named Vitalis. Vitalis’ memorial was set up by her parents with the following inscription in Latin:

### ‘To the Departed Spirits. For Vitalis, our own daughter, who lived 8 years, 11 months and 3 days. Her most devoted parents set up [this memorial].’

The relief above the inscription depicts Vitalis in the guise of the goddess Diana drawing a bow and accompanied by a hound. Diana was an important Roman goddess who was worshipped by males and females of all social classes. Diana was often represented in the Imperial period on official monuments and coinage, and her representation as huntress was commonly associated with male and female children and youths.  

Male youths developed hunting/martial skills under the guidance of Diana, and she oversaw their purification rituals. Diana was also a particularly important figure for females who died before reaching adulthood and fulfilling their potential as wives and mothers. 

Vitalis’ parents, by adding an image Diana, placed their daughter under the protection of the goddess and endowed her with the goddess’ <i>virtus</i>.

> Images: Memorial Tablet for Vitalis, Italy, Marble, AD 50 - 150. Purchased from Charles Ede Ltd, London, 1978. UQ 78.004
