---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/6/
type: stop
section_title: Cremation in Rome
title: Memorial Tablet for Decimus Iunius Venerianus 
page_rank: 6
stop_id: 6
audio_file: stop_6.mp3
hero_images:
 - path: 06-sixth-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Memorial tablet 
---
## Roman Tombs
Roman tombs could contain <i>sarcophagi</i> made of wood, lead, or carved from stone or marble, or <i>ossuaria</i>, small containers containing bones or ashes. During the Augustan period, large <i>columbaria</i>, or structures containing many burial niches, were used to commemorate members of large households, including slaves and freedmen. Tombs able to accommodate mixed styles of burial remained popular.

Many Roman grave markers were also inscribed with information about the deceased including their name, family members, social status, occupation, achievements or virtues. This information is useful for understanding the lives of everyday Romans not mentioned in ancient texts. 

## Mother and Son
For example, this marble inscription, dating to AD 50-75 was set up by a mother for her son. It comes from a site just outside the walls of Rome on the Via Appia. The translated inscription reads: 

### To the Departed Spirits. For Decimus Junius Venerianus. Pompeia Primitiva set this up for her well-deserving son, and for herself, and for her freedmen and freedwomen, and for their descendants. Two feet wide, two and a half feet deep.’ 

As well as commemorating the virtues of her son, Pompeia’s inscription also honours her freedmen and freedwomen, and their descendants, and defines the size of the plot for these future burials. 

The size of Pompeia’s plot is quite small: only two Roman feet by two and a half feet, or about 60 x 75 cm by our modern reckoning, but it shows that Pompeia wanted to provide for the future burials of her household and their families. 

> Image: Memorial Tablet for Decimus Junius Venerianus, Italy, Rome, Marble, AD 50-75. Purchased from Charles Ede Ltd, London, with funds from Mr I.R. Given and Mrs. V.J. Given, 1991. Excavated by Francesco Ficoroni, Church of Saint Caesarius, Via Appia, Rome, 1733. Acquired by The Right Honourable, William Lowther, the 2nd Earl of Lonsdale, Lowther Castle, between 1848-1868, from the estate of The Right Honourable, Frederick Ponsonby, the 3rd Earl of Bessborogh 1793-1844. Part of the Lowther Castle Collection, Penrith, Cumbria, United Kingdom, 1848-1947 Sold by Sotheby and Co, London, 1947. UQ 91.001
