---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/7/
type: stop
section_title: Mummification
title: Coffin Fragments and Amulets 
page_rank: 7
stop_id: 7
audio_file: stop_7.mp3

hero_images:
 - path: 07-seventh-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Cloth Bandages 
 - path: 07-seventh-stop-02.jpg
   alt_text: Coffin Fragment in the Form of a Hand
 - path: 07-seventh-stop-03.jpg
   alt_text: Mummy-Case with Hieroglyphic Inscription 
 - path: 07-seventh-stop-04.jpg
   alt_text: Amulet of Bes
 - path: 07-seventh-stop-05.jpg
   alt_text: Scarab
---

## Mummification Process
The ancient Egyptians are well-known for mummifying the body so that it could be recongised by the soul and receive nourishment. A person could not live and enjoy the afterlife without the ongoing preservation of their physical body.

By the Old Kingdom (around 2600 BC), the Egyptians had developed a method for preserving the body so that it remained lifelike. They also began placing their dead into coffins to protect the bodies from animals and other external forces. 

The first step in this process was to remove, mummify and place the internal organs, the lungs, liver, intestines and stomach, into Canopic jars. The brain was discarded, but the heart was preserved and placed back in the body. The body was then stuffed and covered with natron (a kind of salt) to absorb moisture. Finally, the body was wrapped head to toe in layers of linen bandages with amulets positioned around it for protection.

Examples of these kinds of bandages, amulets, and coffins can be seen in this cabinet. Notice the many forms of amulets depicting different deities, and the painted coffin fragments, one in the form of a hand, from a wooden outer coffin.  

## Protective Powers
Although amulets are decorative in nature, the Egyptians believed that they also had protective powers. When placed inside the wrappings of a mummy, their role was to assist the deceased in the afterlife. Amulets depicting gods and goddesses invoked the powers of the deity, anatomical amulets were designed to protect parts of the body, and zoomorphic amulets invoked the attributes represented by particular animals.

> Images: Cloth Bandages, Coffin and Mummy-Case Fragments, Amulet and Scarab, Egypt, Various Materials, Various Dates. On Loan from a Private Collection. UQ L.16.016; 019; 021; 023; 033.
