---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/8/
type: stop
section_title: Greek Afterlife 
title: Volute Krater 
page_rank: 8
stop_id: 8
audio_file: NASA_main_Go_at_Throttle_Up.mp8
hero_images:
hero_images:
 - path: 08-eighth-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Volute krater
 - path: 08-eigth-stop-02.jpg
   alt_text: Volute krater 
---
The ancient Greek funeral or <i>kêdeia</i> is often described as a three-act drama. 

It comprised the laying out of the body, called the <i>prosthesis</i>, transportation to the place of interment, called the <i>ekphora</i>, and burial of the cremated or inhumed remains. Family members, particularly women, and undertakers were involved, rather than priests, because of the fear of incurring pollution. 

## Honouring the dead 

Family members also regularly visited graves to perform rituals in honour of the deceased. Simple libations called <i>choai</i>, usually of pure water, were poured onto the soil. Others, made from mixed or unmixed honey, milk, water, wine and oil, were often poured from jugs or drinking vessels over the steps supporting a gravestone or over the shaft of a grave.

This large vase is called a volute krater, named for its special volute handles. A krater was usually used for mixing wine and water at a <i>symposium</i> (drinking party), but this example, made by Greeks living in the area of Apulia in Southern Italy around 330 BC, could have been buried with the deceased person or used as a grave marker. The vase shows a <i>naiskos</i> or funerary shrine on the front.

The shrine itself is made up of Ionic columns with a small decorated pediment, all painted in white. Inside the shrine are two figures, one of whom may be the deceased. Other figures are depicted bringing offerings to the shrine. 

To the right, a seated woman holds a box, possibly containing woollen fillets to tie on the grave, while a man below brings flowers and branches to decorate the tomb. On the bottom left, a woman is shown placing a box and vase full of perfumed oil called and alabastron on the front step of the grave. The scenes on the krater give us a good idea of the types of offerings and rituals performed to help preserve the memory of the deceased after death.

> Images: Volute Krater, Apulia, Italy, Terracotta, c. 330 BC. Purchased from Think Ancient, 1987. UQ 87.011.
