---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/9/
type: stop
section_title: The Greco-Roman Afterlife
title: Hydria with Tomb Scene 
page_rank: 9
stop_id: 9
audio_file: stop_9.mp3
hero_images:
hero_images:
 - path: 09-ninth-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Hydria front
 - path: 09-ninth-stop-02.jpg
   alt_text: Hydria side
 - path: 09-ninth-stop-02.jpg
   alt_text: Hydria side 
---
## Mystery Cults
Men and women initiated into Greek and Roman mystery cults participated in rituals based on the idea of rebirth after death. These rituals used special objects and symbols.

This funerary <i>Hydria</i> or water jug is decorated with many symbols which might be linked to  Greek mystery cults. It is thought that these cults gave their initiates secret knowledge of what to expect in the afterlife through an initiation process associated with seemingly mundane objects. 

Notice here the ball of wool, fans, a bunch of grapes, and fillets of wool. These symbols are very common on this type of vase, and are linked to Dionysos and his mysteries.

## The Secrets of the Underworld 

Gold tablets inscribed in ancient Greek, found in graves in Greece, Italy, and beyond, tell us more about these beliefs. They provide instructions on what to do when the deceased reaches the “well fitted house of Hades”. According to the text, they will find a spring of water close to a Cypress tree, flowing into a lake. Another stream flows out of the lake, guarded by spirits who must be given a special greeting:
 
### I am the child of Heavy Earth and Starry sky, but I am drained dry with thirst … give me quickly cold water flowing out of the Lake of Remembrance.

By saying these words, the initiate is given access to the “sacred path” rather than washing away the memory of their lives in the spring of forgetfulness. 

The frequent use of water from vases like this Hydria in funerary rituals, and the central place of water in the gold tablets, it probably not a coincidence. 

> Images: Hydria with Tomb Scene, Apulia, Italy, Terracotta, 400 - 300 BC. Purchased from Holland Coins and Antiquities Ltd, California, 1982. UQ 82.045
